Add docs on Error handling for ibc_packet_receive (#1646)
CosmWasm/cosmwasm: docs/ERROR_HANDLING.md

# Error handling for various entry points

In this document we discuss how different types of errors during contract
execution are handled by wasmd and the blockchain.

## Two levels of errors

When cosmwasm-vm executes a contract, the caller receives a nested result type:
`VmResult<ContractResult<R>>` with some success response `R`. The outer
`VmResult` is created by the host environment and the inner `ContractResult` is
created inside of the contract. Most application specific error should go into
`ContractResult` errors. This is what happens when you use `?` inside of your
contract implementations. The `VmResult`
[error cases](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cosmwasm/blob/v1.2.3/packages/vm/src/errors/vm_error.rs#L11-L148)
include e.g.

- Caching errors such as a missing Wasm file or corrupted module
- Serialization problems in the contract-host communication
- Panics from panic handler in contract
- Errors in crypto API calls
- Out of gas
- Unreachable statements in the Wasm bytecode

## Error handling

> In wasmvm those two error types are merged into one and handled as one thing in
> the caller (wasmd):
> 
> - [Instantiate](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L144-L151)
> - [Execute](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L192-L199)
> - [Migtate](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L275-L282)
> - [Sudo](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L318-L325)
> - [Reply](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L363-L370)
> - [IBCChannelOpen](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L406-L413)
> - [IBCChannelConnect](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L449-L456)
> - [IBCChannelClose](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L492-L499)
> - [IBCPacketAck](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L576-L583)
> - [IBCPacketTimeout](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L620-L627)
> 
> However, there is one exception:
> 
> - [IBCPacketReceive](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L535-L539)
> 
> Instead of returning only the contents of the `Ok` case, the whole
> `IBCReceiveResult` is returned. This allows the caller to handle the two layers
> of errors differently.
> 
> As pointed out by our auditors from Oak Security, this
> [is inconsistent](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/issues/398). Historically
> merging the two error types was the desired behaviour. When `IBCPacketReceive`
> came in, we needed the differentiation to be available in wasmd, which is why
> the API is different than the others. Ideally we always return the contract
> Result and let wasmd handle it.

Reviewer: This part has changed in 2.0:
```suggestion
Before version 2.0 those two error types were merged into one in wasmvm and
handled as one thing in the caller (wasmd). See for example
[Instantiate](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L144-L151).
However, there was one exception to this:
[IBCPacketReceive](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L535-L539).
Instead of returning only the contents of the `Ok` case, the whole
`IBCReceiveResult` is returned. This allows the caller to handle the two layers
of errors differently.

As pointed out by our auditors from Oak Security, this
[was inconsistent](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/issues/398). Historically
merging the two error types was the desired behaviour. When `IBCPacketReceive`
came in, we needed the differentiation to be available in wasmd, which is why
the API was different than the others.

In wasmvm >= 2.0 (wasmd >= 0.51), we
[always return the contract result](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v2.0.0-rc.2/lib.go#L132)
and let wasmd handle it. Apart from making everything more consistent, this also
allows wasmd to handle contract errors differently from VM errors.

Most errors returned by sub-messages are
[redacted](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmd/blob/v0.51.0-rc.1/x/wasm/keeper/msg_dispatcher.go#L205)
by wasmd before passing them back into the contract. The reason for this is the
possible non-determinism of error messages. However, as contract errors come
from the contract, they have to be deterministic. With the new separation, wasmd
now passes the full contract error message back into the calling contract,
massively improving the debugging experience.
```

# Error handling for various entry points

In this document we discuss how different types of errors during contract
execution are handled by wasmd and the blockchain.

## Two levels of errors

When cosmwasm-vm executes a contract, the caller receives a nested result type:
`VmResult<ContractResult<R>>` with some success response `R`. The outer
`VmResult` is created by the host environment and the inner `ContractResult` is
created inside of the contract. Most application specific error should go into
`ContractResult` errors. This is what happens when you use `?` inside of your
contract implementations. The `VmResult`
[error cases](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cosmwasm/blob/v1.2.3/packages/vm/src/errors/vm_error.rs#L11-L148)
include e.g.

- Caching errors such as a missing Wasm file or corrupted module
- Serialization problems in the contract-host communication
- Panics from panic handler in contract
- Errors in crypto API calls

> - Out of gas

Reviewer 2: Are you sure OutOfGas goes through VM error?
I kind of felt this turns into some other panic n the wasmvm rather than an error. But I may be wrong.. it was a long time since I looked there. Just asking to confirm in the code

Author: There are cases in which the VM calls into the chain (e.g. humanize, DB access). Those calls get their own gas meter. When they run out of gas, the error propagates chain -> wasmvm -> cosmwasm-vm -> wasmvm -> chain as a `VmError::GasDepletion`. Also when the Wasmer metering runs out of points, the execution is terminated and a `VmError::GasDepletion` is returned.

So yeah, some of the out of gas end up there, others are not

- [IBCChannelOpen](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L406-L413)
- [IBCChannelConnect](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L449-L456)
- [IBCChannelClose](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L492-L499)
- [IBCPacketAck](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L576-L583)
- [IBCPacketTimeout](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L620-L627)

However, there is one exception:

- [IBCPacketReceive](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.0/lib.go#L535-L539)

Instead of returning only the contents of the `Ok` case, the whole
`IBCReceiveResult` is returned. This allows the caller to handle the two layers
of errors differently.

As pointed out by our auditors from Oak Security, this
[is inconsistent](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/issues/398). Historically
merging the two error types was the desired behaviour. When `IBCPacketReceive`
came in, we needed the differentiation to be available in wasmd, which is why
the API is different than the others. Ideally we always return the contract
Result and let wasmd handle it.

## Handing ibc_packet_receive errors

> For wasmd before 0.32, contract errors and VM errors were handled the same. They

Reviewer 2: This is very clear (and much better than my text here), but it misses where the original idea came from. Maybe capture this workflow (or is that TMI and we just focus on the 0.32 change, as anything before 0.45 was ancient and no one did IBC then anyway)?

Until 0.X it was handled like the rest where any error reverted the whole transaction.
In order to improve developer ergonomics, in 0.X (the 0.45 upgrade release) we changed this such that both cases revert state change but return error acknoweldgement packet.
In 0.32, we fully implemented the discussion here (link to issue Alex posted) and differentiate between these two cases.

Author: I'd indeed focus on just the two stages:
- From [0.22.0](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmd/tree/v0.22.0) (2022-01-20, with https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmd/pull/717) to 0.31
- From 0.32 and beyond

But I can try to expand a bit why they have a different behaviour without going back all the way to pre-0.22 behavior.

Author: Done in 6f8b4ec41050b588c98354d4f806e2b5b64a8945

| `ibc_packet_receive`  | ⏮️ state reverted<br>✅ tx succeeds with error ack | ⏮️ state reverted<br>❌ tx fails              |
| `ibc_packet_ack`      | ⏮️ state reverted<br>❌ tx fails                   | ⏮️ state reverted<br>❌ tx fails              |
| `ibc_packet_timeout`  | ⏮️ state reverted<br>❌ tx fails                   | ⏮️ state reverted<br>❌ tx fails              |

## Error acknowledgement formatting

In case of a contract error in `ibc_packet_receive`, wasmd creates an error
acknowledgement. The format used is a JSON object with a single top level
`error` string such as `{"error":"some error text"}`. This format is the JSON
serialization of the ibc-go
[Acknowledgement](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/v7.0.0/proto/ibc/core/channel/v1/channel.proto#L156-L162)
type and compatible with ICS-20.

If you are using the acknowledgement types shipped with cosmwasm-std
([#1512](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cosmwasm/issues/1512)), your protocol's

> acknowledgement is compatible with that.

Reviewer 3: I don't fully understand how the `StdAck` is handled downstream. It is important to consider the state commit/rollback for "errors"  scenario [2 and 3](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmd/issues/697#issuecomment-992573516) 

#### Scenario 3:
If the "error" is returned to wasmd as [IBCReceiveResult.Err](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.1/types/ibc.go#L249), then the state is rolled back and the error text [redacted (currently)](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmd/issues/1289) and serialized into the json format above. 
#### Scenario 2:
If the "error" is returned to wasmd as [IBCReceiveResult.Ok](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.1/types/ibc.go#L248)[.Acknowledgement](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/blob/v1.2.1/types/ibc.go#L260) then the data is returned as it is with the state committed. I assume `StdAck` is doing this but I may got it wrong

If you are using a customized acknowledgement type, you need to convert contract

> errors to error acks yourself in `ibc_packet_receive`. The `Never` type provides

Reviewer 3: This seem to be scenario 2 where the state is committed.
In order to achieve scenario 3, the contract would have to use submessages as in Ethan's [demo](https://github.com/confio/cw-ibc-demo/pull/20).

Author: What this does is: never create a contract error. Then `IBCReceiveResult.Err` is never set. The two cases left in wasmd are:
1. Write the acknowledgement from the contract to state
2. A VM error fails the trainsaction (wasmd 0.32+)
